
                                                 R. Moskowitz, ICSA Labs

Internet Draft

Document: <draft-moskowitz-hip-impl-01.txt>          February 2001



                         Host Identity Payload

                             Implementation



Status of this Memo


   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with
   all provisions of Section 10 of RFC2026.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



Table of Contents


1. Abstract...........................................................2
2. Conventions used in this document..................................2
3. Introduction.......................................................2
4. HIP Rendezvous Server - support for mobile Responders..............2
5. Using LSIs in place of IP addresses................................3
5.1. HIP address translation services.................................3
6. Using the Host Identity............................................3
7. HIP Fragmentation Support..........................................4
8. HIP Scenarios......................................................4
8.1. HIP Scenario #1..................................................4
8.2. HIP Scenario #2..................................................5
8.3. HIP Scenario #3..................................................5
8.4. HIP Scenario #4..................................................6
8.5. Refusing a HIP exchange..........................................7
8.6. Opportunistic HIP................................................8
9. Localize Address Translation with HIP..............................8
10. Localize Address Translation example of FTP.......................8
11. Security Considerations...........................................8
11.1. HITs used in ACLs...............................................9


Moskowitz                                                            1

                        Host Identity Payload           February 2001


12. IANA Considerations..............................................10
13. ICANN Considerations.............................................10
14. References.......................................................10
15. Acknowledgments..................................................10
16. Author's Address.................................................11
17. Copyright Statement..............................................11


1. Abstract

   This memo describes implementation aspects of HIP [HIP].  Particular
   attention is paid to items needed for HIP to span Addressing Realms
   (e.g. using NATs) and address reassignment (e.g. in mobility).


2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED",  "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC-2119].


3. Introduction

   The Host Identity Payload and the HIP protocol have a set of
   characteristics that make it especially amendable to today's real
   Internet challenges like end-to-end connectivity and security across
   addressing realms (via NATs) and mobility support.  Beyond host
   authentication and light-weight IPsec key exchange, HIP's decoupling
   of the Internetworking and Transport layers allow it this support of
   NAT transversal and mobility.

   The NAT transversal is accomplished at the cost of maintaining parts
   of the HIP state in the NAT systems.  The NAT is not privy to the
   keying material exchanged between the systems.  NAT transversal DOES
   rely on plentiful addresses on the private side of the NAT, but can
   use a single address (without PORT mappings) on the global or public
   side of the NAT.


4. HIP Rendezvous Server - support for mobile Responders

   A mobile responder does not have to rely on the availability of
   Dynamic DNS with DNSSEC to make its current IP address known to
   potential Initiators.  HIP can make use of a Rendezvous Server.  The
   functions of a Rendezvous Server are minimal; it needs to track the
   Responder's IP address, and it needs to forward any HIP I1 packets
   to the Responder.

   A Responder designates its Rendezvous Server by using a PTR RR to
   the Rendezvous Server in place of an A RR.  The HI and HIT KEY RR
   records MUST also be provided.  Use of the PTR RR allows the
   Rendezvous Server to change its IP address without all relying

Moskowitz                                                            2

                        Host Identity Payload           February 2001


   Responders to make DNS changes.  The Rendezvous Server MUST have an
   enrollment procedure.  This procedure MUST include the registration
   of the Responder's HIT and current IP address.  It MAY include the
   Responder's HI.  The procedure MUST support changes to the HIT.
   Whenever the Responder needs to change its IP address, it sets up a
   HIP authenticated connection to the Rendezvous Server and sends a
   HIP readdress payload.  The Responder MAY use a very long lifetime
   for this connection.

   Since the Rendezvous Server only needs to support is Responder
   registration, Responder readdressing, and I1 HIP packet forwarding,
   the Rendezvous Server has little work to do, and needs minimal
   bandwidth.


5. Using LSIs in place of IP addresses

   LSIs can be used in place of IP addresses in socket calls.  This can
   be accommodated with the aid of a modified resolver module.  When a
   HIP exchange produces, and exchanges the LSIs, either the LSI can be
   provided to the applications in place of the IP addresses and then
   the HIP module perform any substitution required, or the HIP module
   can intercept all address requests and use the LSI where
   appropriate.

   At issue here is when do applications get IP addresses, and where do
   they use them.  The LSIs are not established until the 3rd and 4th
   HIP packets, which is probably after the application opened the
   connection.  If the applications are using IP addresses within their
   data stream (as FTP commands do), the HIP module will have to
   perform tasks similar to a NAT to find these addresses and replace
   them with the appropriate LSI.

   If the applications are using LSIs (as could be the case on
   subsequent connections during the lifetime of the HIP state), then
   the HIP module directs opens to LSIs to the appropriate IP address.
   The HIP module would not need to perform NAT functions on imbedded
   IP addresses.


5.1. HIP address translation services

   Since the LSI cannot be used directly by applications in many cases,
   the HIP implementations can provide Address Translation services for
   registered applications.  An application can either provide HIP with
   the information of where imbedded addresses are, or can supply a
   piece of code for HIP to use to replace addresses with LSIs.  A HIP
   implementation MUST provide this function for FTP and SHOULD provide
   it for HTTP.


6. Using the Host Identity


Moskowitz                                                            3

                        Host Identity Payload           February 2001


   There are a number of ways that Host Identity can be used in
   Internet Protocols.  The first is to use it in IKE [IKE].  HIT can
   be used in Main Mode.  For this, the Host Identity MUST be a Public
   Key, and an appropriate Main Mode authentication (e.g. DSA
   signature) used.  The SPI of the HIT can replace the usage of IP
   addresses in IKE.  An appropriate ISAKMP [ISAKMP] payload will be
   needed to accommodate the Host Identity and HIT.  These additions to
   IKE would produce a mode of operation for IKE that could traverse a
   NAT.  This, coupled with ESP transport mode, would produce a NAT
   friendly IPsec mode (note that the NATs can alter none of the data
   within the ESP).

   Another, and perhaps more powerful mode is a new, lightweight,
   protocol that will allow for one host to convey its Host Identity to
   another host.  This Host Identity Protocol will enable two hosts to
   exchange Host Identity and related information and rapidly establish
   an ESP Security Association.  It will lack the fine-grain controls
   of IKE and some of IKE's security features (like identity
   protection).


7. HIP Fragmentation Support

   A HIP implementation MUST support IP fragmentation/reassembly.  HIP
   packets can get large, and may encounter low MTUs along their routed
   path.  Since HIP does not provide a mechanism to use multiple IP
   datagrams for a single HIP packet, support of path MTU discovery
   does not bring any value to HIP.  HIP aware NAT systems MUST perform
   any IP reassembly/fragmentation.


8. HIP Scenarios

   There are a number of scenarios for using HIP.  The variables in
   these scenarios are the number of address realms (managed by NATs)
   and the jurisdictional location of the boundaries, and the type of
   Host Identity (public key or string like an FQDN).

   A HIP exchange SHOULD be initiated whenever the DNS lookup returns
   HIP KEY resource records.  Since some hosts may choose not to have
   information in DNS, hosts SHOULD support opportunistic HIP.


8.1. HIP Scenario #1

   Initiator and Responder in common addressing realm (i.e. both public
   or both private).

   Initiator gets IP address, HI, and HIT of Responder somehow.
        Hard coded (bad)
        DNS lookup
                DNSSEC important


Moskowitz                                                            4

                        Host Identity Payload           February 2001


   I --> DNS (lookup R)
   I <-- DNS (R's address, HI, and HIT)
   I1      I --> R (Hi. Here is my I1, let's talk HIP)
   R1      I <-- R (OK.  Here is my R1, handle this HIP cookie)
   I2      I --> R (Compute, compute, here is my counter I2)
   R2      I <-- R (OK.  LetÆs finish HIP cookie with my R2)

   All further packets are without HIP, HIP is implied with the SPIs in
   ESP

   I --> R (ESP protected data)
   I <-- R (ESP protected data)


8.2. HIP Scenario #2

   Initiator behind NAT, Responder publicly addressed.

   Initiator gets IP address of Responder somehow.
        Hard coded (bad)
        DNS lookup
                DNSSEC important
                If no default route to NAT, DNS ALG provides NAT with
                        Responder's IP address and HIT; NAT provides
                        DNS ALG with substitute internal address.

   I --> NAT(I) --> DNS (lookup R)
   I <-- NAT(I) <-- DNS (R's info, record it in NAT)
   I --> NAT(I) --> R (Hi, let's talk HIP)
        NAT records Initiator's HIT and address makes address changes
                in IP header
   I <-- NAT(I) <-- R (OK, handle this HIP cookie)
        NAT changes addresses based on HITs in HIP.
   I --> NAT(I) --> R (Compute, compute, here is my counter HIP with
           SPI(R))
        NAT adds Initiator's Responder SPI to I/R state and changes
        addresses.
   I <-- NAT(I) <-- R (OK, LetÆs finish HIP cookie, and here is SPI(I))
        NAT adds Responder's Initiator SPI to I/R state and changes
        addresses.


   All further packets are without HIP, HIP is implied with the SPIs in
   ESP.
   NAT uses SPIs for address state.
   Hosts use SPIs in place of IP addresses inside protocols.
        E.G. Initiator uses Responder's Initiator SPI (packet 4) for
   FTP port command.  Responder is able to remap this to state it has
   on Initiator.


8.3. HIP Scenario #3


Moskowitz                                                            5

                        Host Identity Payload           February 2001


   Initiator publicly addressed, Responder behind NAT.

   NAT configured with Responder's IP address and HIT.  DNS for the
   responder will have the NAT's address.

   Initiator gets IP address of Responder (NAT) somehow.
        Hard coded (bad)
        DNS lookup
                DNSSEC important
                If no default route to NAT, NAT maps Initiator's HIT
                        and SPI to an internal address.  Since the SPI
                        has to be used after HIP exchange, and SPI is
                        on a host basis, the Initiator will use a
                        separate internal address for each internal
                        host.

   I --> DNS (lookup R, get NAT's address and R's HIT)
   I <-- DNS (R's info)
   I --> NAT(R) --> R (Hi, let's talk HIP)
        NAT records Initiator's HIT and address makes address changes
                in IP header.  Uses Responder's HIT to map to
                responder.
   I <-- NAT(R) <-- R (OK, handle this HIP cookie)
        NAT changes addresses based on HITs in HIP.
   I --> NAT(R) --> R (Compute, compute, here is my counter HIP with
           SPI(R))
        NAT adds Initiator's Responder SPI to I/R state and changes
        addresses.  The NAT will have one responder HIT to address
        state, but potentially many responder SPI to address state.
   I <-- NAT(R) <-- R (OK, LetÆs finish HIP cookie, and here is SPI(I))
        NAT adds Responder's Initiator SPI to I/R state and changes
        addresses.

   All further packets are without HIP, HIP is implied with the SPIs in
   ESP.
   NAT uses SPIs for address state.
   Hosts use SPIs in place of IP addresses inside protocols.
        E.G. Initiator uses Responder's Initiator SPI (packet 4) for
   FTP port command.  Responder is able to remap this to state it has
   on Initiator.


8.4. HIP Scenario #4

   Initiator and Responder behind separate NATs.

   NAT configured with Responder's IP address and HIT.  DNS for the
   responder will have the NAT's address.

   Initiator gets IP address of Responder (NAT) somehow.
        Hard coded (bad)
        DNS lookup
                DNSSEC important

Moskowitz                                                            6

                        Host Identity Payload           February 2001


                If no default route to initiator's NAT, DNS ALG
                        provides NAT with Responder's IP address and
                        HIT; NAT provides DNS ALG with substitute
                        internal address.
                If no default route to responder's NAT, NAT maps
                        Initiator's HIT and SPI to an internal address.
                        Since the SPI has to be used after HIP
                        exchange, and SPI is on a host basis, the
                        Initiator will use a separate internal address
                        for each internal host.

   I --> NAT(I) --> DNS (lookup R, get NAT's address and R's HIT)
   I <-- NAT(I) <-- DNS (R's info, record it in NAT)
   I --> NAT(I) --> NAT(R) --> R (Hi, let's talk HIP)
        Initiator's NAT records Initiator's HIT and address makes
        address changes in IP header
        Responder's NAT records Initiator's HIT and address makes
                address changes in IP header.  Uses Responder's HIT to
                map to responder.
   I <-- NAT(I) <-- NAT(R) <-- R (OK, handle this HIP cookie)
        Both NATs changes addresses based on HITs in HIP.
   I --> NAT(I) --> NAT(R) --> R (Compute, compute, here is my counter
           HIP with SPI(R))
        Initiator's NAT adds Initiator's Responder SPI to I/R state and
        changes addresses.
        Responder's NAT adds Initiator's Responder SPI to I/R state and
        changes addresses.  The NAT will have one responder HIT to
        address state, but potentially many responder SPI to address
        state.
   I <-- NAT(I) <-- NAT(R) <-- R (OK, LetÆs finish HIP cookie, and here
           is SPI(I))
        NAT adds Responder's Initiator SPI to I/R state and changes
        addresses.

   All further packets are without HIP, HIP is implied with the SPIs in
   ESP.
   Both NATs uses SPIs for address state.
   Hosts use SPIs in place of IP addresses inside protocols.
        E.G. Initiator uses Responder's Initiator SPI (packet 4) for
   FTP port command.  Responder is able to remap this to state it has
   on Initiator.


8.5. Refusing a HIP exchange

   A HIP aware host may choose not to accept a HIP exchange
   negotiation.  If the host's policy is to only be an initiator, it
   should begin its own HIP exchange.  There is a risk of a race
   condition if each host's policy is to only be an initiator, at which
   point the HIP exchange will fail.

   If the host's policy does not permit it to enter into a HIP exchange
   with the initiator, it should send an ICMP Host Unreachable,

Moskowitz                                                            7

                        Host Identity Payload           February 2001


   Administratively Prohibited message.  A more complex HIP packet is
   not used here as it actually opens up more potential DOS attacks
   than a simple ICMP message.


8.6. Opportunistic HIP

   A host MAY attempt to force a system that initiates a regular TCP or
   UDP connection to restart the connection using HIP.  This
   opportunistic HIP is fraught with denial of service attacks, but is
   provided for those that wish to risk the DOS attacks to gain this
   function.

   If a host receives a TCP SYN or a UDP packet from a host that it has
   not done a HIP exchange, the receiving host MAY attempt to force a
   HIP exchange by sending a HIP packet that contains:

        HI, HIT, and SIG

   In other words, the host sends the initiator the information that it
   would have gotten from a DNS lookup.  Once the initiator has this
   HIP information, it should delay its transport negotiation, perform
   the HIP exchange and then restart the higher layer (with the I2 HIP
   packet).


9. Localize Address Translation with HIP

   Many applications that transmit IP addresses within the data stream
   cannot be easily changed to accommodate using the LSI in place of
   the address.  A HIP implementation SHOULD provide an address
   translation service and allow for applications to register and
   provide for their specific translation requirements.  For example,
   FTP port 21 would be registered with a module that would replace the
   address in the port command with the LSI.

   The HIP implementation SHOULD supply the basic translation services,
   for FTP and HTTP URLs.  The implementation SHOULD provide a
   translation registration service for other products to add to the
   local translation function.


10. Localize Address Translation example of FTP

   This service listens on TCP port 21 (FTP Commands) for an FTP server
   or client port selected by an FTP client.  One the client side of
   the implementation, the service looks for PORT commands, and
   replaces IP addresses with the matching LSIs.  This is reversed on
   the server side service that replaces LSIs with IP addresses.


11. Security Considerations


Moskowitz                                                            8

                        Host Identity Payload           February 2001


   HIP is designed to provide secure authentication of hosts and
   provide a fast key exchange for IPsec ESP.  HIP also attempts to
   limit the exposure of the host to various denial-of-service and man-
   in-the-middle attacks.  In so doing, HIP itself is subject to its
   own DOS and MITH attacks that potentially could be more damaging to
   a host's ability to conduct business as usual.

   HIP transparently provides mobility for the initiating system.
   Mobility for a responder requires a Rendezvous Server.  There are
   two potential risks with these servers.  They can be compromised and
   have their forwarding information altered.  This will result in the
   mobile Responder being unreachable.  They are a nature place for a
   MITH attack.  Thus the responders are placing a large amount of
   trust in these systems.

   HIP optionally supports opportunistic negotiation.  That is, if a
   host receives a start of transport without a HIP negotiation, it can
   attempt to force a HIP exchange before accepting the connection.
   This has the potential for DOS attacks against both hosts.  If the
   method to force the start of HIP is expensive on either host, the
   attacker need only spoof a TCP SYN.  This would put both systems
   into the expensive operations.  HIP avoids this attack by having the
   responder send a simple HIP packet that it can build at HI selection
   time.  Since this packet is fixed and easily spoofed the initiator
   only reacts to it if it has just started a connection to the
   responder, and it sends the easy to construct I1 HIP packet.


11.1. HITs used in ACLs

   It is expected that HITs will be used in ACLs.  NATs will use HITs
   to control egress and ingress to networks, with an assurance
   difficult to achieve today.

   There has been considerable bad experience with distributed ACLs
   that contain public key related material, for example with SSH.  If
   the owner of the key needs to revoke it for any reason, the task of
   finding all locations where the key is held in an ACL may be
   impossible.  If the reason for the revocation is due to private key
   theft, this could be a serious issue.

   A host can keep track of all of its partners that might use its HIT
   in an ACL by logging all remote HITs.  It should only be necessary
   to log responder hosts.  With this information, the host can notify
   the various hosts about the change to the HIT.  There has been no
   attempt here to develop a secure method (like in CMP and CMC) to
   issue the HIT revocation notice.

   NATs, however, are transparent to the HIP aware systems by design.
   Thus the host many find it difficult to notify any NAT that is using
   a HIT in an ACL.  Since most systems will know of the NATs for their
   network, there should be a process by which they can notify these
   NATs of the change of the HIT.  This is MANDITORY for systems that

Moskowitz                                                            9

                        Host Identity Payload           February 2001


   function as responders behind a NAT (see sec 8.3 and 8.4 and the
   processing of the I1 HIP packets by the responder's NAT).  In a
   similar vein, if a host is notified of a change in a HIT of an
   initiator, it should notify its NAT of the change.  In this manner,
   NATs will get updated with the HIT change.


12. IANA Considerations

   The IANA considerations for HIP are covered in the Host Identity
   payload document [HIP].


13. ICANN Considerations

   ICANN are covered in the HIP Architecture [HIPARCH] document.


14. References

   [HIP], Moskowitz, R., "Host Identity Payload", draft-ietf-moskowitz-
   hip-02.txt, January 2001.

   [RFC-2119], Bradner, S, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels", RFC 2119, Harvard University, March 1997

   [HIPARCH], Moskowitz, R., "Host Identity Payload Architecture",
   draft-ietf-moskowitz-hip-arch-02.txt, January 2001.

   [IKE], Harkins, D., and Carrel, D., "The Internet Key Exchange", RFC
   2409, November 1998.

   [ISAKMP], Maughan, D., Schertler, M., Schneider, M., and Turner, J.,
   "Internet Security Association and Key Management Protocol", RFC
   2408, November 1998.


15. Acknowledgments

   The drive to create HIP came to being after attending the MALLOC
   meeting at IETF 43.  Baiju Patel and Hilarie Orman really gave me
   the assist to get HIP beyond 5 paragraphs of ideas.  It has matured
   considerably since the early drafts thanks to extensive input from
   IETFers.  Most importantly, its design goals are articulated and are
   different from other efforts in this direction.  Particular mention
   goes to the members of the NameSpace Research Group of the IRTF.
   Noel Chiappa provided the framework for LSIs and Kieth Moore the
   impetuous to provide resolvability.  Steve Deering provided
   encouragement to keep working, as a solid proposal can act as a
   proof of ideas for a research group.

   Many others contributed; extensive security tips were provided by
   Steve Bellovin.  Rob Austein kept the DNS parts on track.  Paul

Moskowitz                                                           10

                        Host Identity Payload           February 2001


   Kocher taught me how to make the cookie exchange expensive for the
   Initiator to respond, but easy for the Responder to validate.
   Rodney Thayer and Hugh Daniels provide extensive feedback.  John
   Gilmore kept me challenged to provide something of value.  I hope I
   have.


16. Author's Address

   Robert Moskowitz
   ICSA Labs
   1200 Walnut Bottom Rd.
   Carlisle, PA  17013
   Email: rgm@icsa.net


17. Copyright Statement

   Copyright (c) The Internet Society (2001). All Rights Reserved.
   This document and translations of it may be copied and furnished to
   others, and derivative works that comment on or otherwise explain it
   or assist in its implementation may be prepared, copied, published
   and distributed, in whole or in part, without restriction of any
   kind, provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph
   are included on all such copies and derivative works.  However, this
   document itself may not be modified in any way, such as by removing
   the copyright notice or references to the Internet Society or other
   Internet organizations, except as needed for the purpose of
   developing Internet standards in which case the procedures for
   copyrights defined in the Internet Standards process must be
   followed, or as required to translate it into languages other than
   English.

   The limited permissions granted above are perpetual and will not be
   revoked by the Internet Society or its successors or assigns.

   This document and the information contained herein is provided on an
   "AS IS" basis and THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING
   TASK FORCE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING
   BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION
   HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.












Moskowitz                                                           11
